



I2NSF                                                       R. Moskowitz
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Standards Track                             H. Birkholz
Expires: August 17, 2017                                  Fraunhofer SIT
                                                       February 13, 2017


                  Secruity Event Refinement Framework
                       draft-birkholz-serf-latest

Abstract

   Millions of low-level events, such as byte counters, triggered filter
   policies, or interaction attempts, are created continuously in a
   multitude of network topologies.  Constrained-node networks, such as
   sensor networks, smart meters in LPWAN, or vehicle networks with
   various interconnected layer 2 topologies, exhibit domain-specific
   behaviors that can be considered to be compliant or - in contrast -
   as potential anomalies in regard to declarative guidance.  In order
   to facilitate an automated assessment of the behavior of
   interconnected components that constitute, for example, service
   chains or downstream work-flows, available low-level events have to
   be brought into a larger semantic context by refining them into a
   lower volume of security events with a higher grade of expressiveness
   or significance.  This work describes an architecture, its
   corresponding components, interfaces and interaction model, as well
   as a security event information model to facilitate a refinement
   framework to process event streams via aggregation, correlation and
   machine-learning methods.  The components defined are virtual
   encapsulations of corresponding machine-learning and AI function that
   require certain features derived from the event data that is made
   available by low-level event streams.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  General Architechture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  SERF components & functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1.1.  Machine-Learning & AI procedures  . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Management Plane functions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Control Plane Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Data Plane Functions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Section 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   In the domain of networks, security automation requires input of high
   refinement and high confidence to base corresponding security
   decisions on.  Vital tasks that depend on these refined security
   events include the verification of compliance in regard to the
   integrity of network separation (network slicing) or content of PDU
   flows and the assessment of the impact of identified vulnerabilities,
   configuration drift, or malfunctions that result in degraded
   availability or integrity of data.  In the domain of autonomous
   services, security automation supports the decision making in the
   domains of spacial cognition, advanced planning, adaptive behavior or
   game theory based decision making.  Creating relevant (security)



Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


   events of high refinement from an staggering amount of raw events of
   low refinement is the objective of the solution proposed in this
   document.  This document defines and illustrates five core elements
   that are required to facilitate a refinement process that conducts
   aggregation, correlation and analysis of event streams with machine
   learning and AI procedures in a distributed mash of virtual (and
   sometimes also hardware-bound) functions:

   o  an information sharing architecture that is feasible to be applied
      in the thing-2-thing scope, including a pub/sub approach virtual
      functions that are bundled in SERF components can exchange
      information with

   o  an information model that defines the basic set of information
      elements providing the features required for machine-learning
      functions and AI procedures to create output of higher refinement
      in order to satisfy common security requirements via automation
      procedures

   o  a concise data model for security events that can be interpreted
      and processed by SERF components to fuel corresponding machine-
      learning functions and AI procedures

   o  two alternative architecture designs based on CoAP pub/sub
      interaction model and based on SSLS peer-2-peer topics that are
      brokered via a resource directory

   o  integration of content authorization into existing and emerging
      building-blocks that compose a SERF domain, leveraging solutions
      developed in the ACE work group

   The architectures defined in this document provide the capability to
   bundle machine-learning and AI procedures in SERF components in the
   form of virtual functions.  Hence, SERF components can be migrated,
   spawned and discarded to support dynamic changes in regard to
   processing capability and scalability.  The dynamic orchestration of
   the virtual functions that compose a SERF domain address the
   resilience and scalability required to mitigate or remediate
   malicious acts, such as DDoS attacks in production systems, targeted
   attacks at the SERF domain itself, or massive system failures.  SERF
   components are able to attest their integrity using traditional
   remote attestation and emerging attestation procedures (such as
   TUDA).  Heterogeneous sources of events are addressed by SERF, such
   as proprietary anomaly detection components, netflow statistics,
   automobile ECU, actuators and sensors in ICS, or constrained-node
   networks in the thing-2-thing scope.





Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


1.1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119, BCP 14 [RFC2119].

2.  General Architechture

   Every SERF component is a bundle of virtual functions with interfaces
   to the management, control and data plane.

2.1.  SERF components & functions

   SERF components are bundles of virtual functions that can be chained,
   composed in a service graph, migrated or orchestrated, and therefore
   dynamically instantiated, modified or discarded.

   SERF components contain SERF functions.  A SERF function typically is
   a specifc software (agent) that processes events or collects and
   provides corresponding event data continuously, scheduled or on an
   ad-hoc basis.  The interconnected work-flows (service chains) SERF
   components compose constitute a SERF domain.  SERF components can be
   geographically grouped, spawned into distributed cloud infrastructure
   or use the excess processing capabilities of existing infrastructure
   as part of a fog-computing domain.  SERF components that emit raw
   events to a SERF domain typically reside on endpoints, such as
   notebooks, vehicle ECU, IoT devices, or ICS actuators.  The majority
   of SERF functions support the aggregation, correlation, analysis,
   assertion and assessment of events.  Each SERF component supports the
   goal of event refinement in one way or another.  The output of a SERF
   domain are events - although it could be argued that the
   corresponding events can be of such high refinement that they are
   analogous to statements (as produced by a SACM domain) or even
   reports (as produces by a MILE domain).

   Larger picture orchestration, such as load balancing, utilization
   based instantiation and requirement-based migration of functions
   (which requires the resolution of discrepancy between contradicting
   requirements via appropriate machine-learning and AI functions) is
   conducted by a specialized mesh of SERF orchestrator components.

2.1.1.  Machine-Learning & AI procedures

   The heart of very SERF component are the modular machine-learning and
   AI procedures that contributes to the event refinement framework.
   Even the simplest aggregation procedure can benefit from learning a
   standard pattern and alerting deviations from that pattern.  Most



Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


   desirable for SERF component modules are un-supervised machine-
   learning procedures, but semi-supervised or even supervised learning
   has to be applied if unsupervised-learning results in a too high
   amount of false positives.  A chaining of unsupervised machine-
   learning function and basic pattern recognition procedures, such as
   text-distance analysis, markov-models, or dynamic time warping can
   support the semi-supervised learning methods and in the end result in
   a SERF domain that does not require supervision, in the end.

2.2.  Management Plane functions

   Imperative and declarative guidance is transported via the management
   plane.  Short term loss of availability of the management plane does
   not impact the functionality of a SERF domain.  Components retain
   their (potentially dynamic) configuration that is the basis for
   orchestration capabilities on the control plane and the corresponding
   refinement work-flow on the data plane.

   Examples include:

   o  Configuration of the functions incorporated in a SERF component

   o  Monitoring of resource load, availability, and other indicators
      critical to a congestion-less event refinement work-flow

   o  Detection of configuration drift via declarative guidance and
      remediation of corresponding configuration that is in conflict
      with declarative guidance.

2.3.  Control Plane Functions

   A work-flow of event refinement is orchestrated via control plane
   functions.  A significant portion of control plane functions is
   facilitated by each SERF component itself.  Examples include:

   o  propagation of individual capabilities (based on incorporated
      functions) and corresponding imperative guidance regarding input
      and output of interfaces provided by a SERF components via
      registration and discovery function

   o  registration, subscription and publication functions, also peer-
      2-peer negotiation of communication channels with specific
      interaction and data model (e.g.  IPFIX, NETMOD)

   o  monitoring of SERF component specific event volume, trending
      analysis and dynamical adaption of function resources of the SERF
      components itself and publication of corresponding control events
      and features to support the orchestration of the entire SERF



Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


      domain via a redundant mash of SERFO (SERF orchestration
      components).

   o  requesting and updating incorporated function modules that extend
      or change the interfaces of a SERF component via changing,
      adapting or updating corresponding refinement functions (e.g.
      machine-learning functions or AI procedures).  Effectively, the
      need to modify a function set of a SERF component is detected and
      orchestrated on the control plane.  The actual update is conducted
      via the management plane in the context of imperative guidance
      (which new function has to be installed in which way) and
      declarative guidance (which function should be replaced by which
      function).

2.4.  Data Plane Functions

   On the data plane, the actual function chaining is conducted.  The
   output of each function has to be processable in an automatic fashion
   by the next function in the chain.  While the term "chain" implies a
   linear sequence of single function, in fact a directed graph that
   might even include refinement loops with termination conditions can
   be composed in a SERF domain.  Hence, a service graph with rather
   complex event impressment streams can be the result of data plane
   event flow.  The standard payload of the data plane are (security)
   events.  The structure of data plane function typically adheres to a
   hierarchical (tree- or taxonomy-like) composition.  This is only the
   typical default in general setups.  In none-cricle-free graphs with
   multiple condition based branching and various work-flow layers can
   be the result of a rather sophisticated event refinement requirements
   a data plane work-flow is based upon.

   Typical data plane function include:

   o  machine-learning algorithms, such as (hidden) markov-models,
      neural-networks, time-line-analysis, CEP sliding window analysis,
      text-distance-analysis and others.

   o  interface that define the required data model for data in motion,
      optionally semantic properties (e.g. in the form of tags,
      annotations or even ontological structured data), interface that
      define the output data model for data in motion

   o  specific data plane operation that can generate data, access and
      modify SERF components that provide existing (potentially
      historical, e.g. a event log, or complementary, e.g. a
      vulnerability data base) data, request data from SERF components
      or standard pools of data (e.g. an LDAP directory).




Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


   o  event format constructor, parser and validators

   o  resolving discrepancies between contradicting informations of
      events of any refinement level.

   Larger picture orchestration, such as load balancing, utilization
   based instantiation and requirement-based migration of functions
   (which requires the resolution of discrepancy between contradicting
   requirements via appropriate machine-learning and AI functions).
   (typically called "downstream", although feedback loops can create
   events that are inserted again of an event processesment level of
   lower refinement or result in specifically tailored monitoring task
   or the instantiation of more specific SERF components to facilitate a
   more unique (situation-depended/aware) refinement work-flow.

3.  Section 2

   Some more meat here.

4.  IANA considerations

   This document will include requests to IANA:

   o  first item

   o  second item

5.  Security Considerations

   There are always some.

6.  Acknowledgements

   Maybe.

7.  Change Log

   No changes yet.

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.






Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    SERF                     February 2017


Authors' Addresses

   Robert Moskowitz
   Huawei
   Oak Park, MI  48237
   USA

   Email: rgm@htt-consult.com


   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


































Moskowitz & Birkholz     Expires August 17, 2017                [Page 8]
